**Music Representation of COVID-19 Data in America + α**
========================================================

DSC160 Data Science and the Arts - Final Project - Generative Arts -
Spring 2020

Project Team Members:

-   Byungheon Jeong, b1jeong\@ucsd.edu

-   Sabrina Ho, ssh026\@ucsd.edu

-   Xinrui Zhan, x5zhan\@ucsd.edu

-   Yiheng Ye, yiy291\@ucsd.edu

**Abstract**
------------

With the number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 increasing exponentially,
we want to present how badly COVID-19 has affected the United States.
Nowadays, numerical and graphical representations often lose their
descriptive power when it is viewed too often and numbers are too
detached from our daily life. So we decided to represent the confirmed
COVID-19 cases across the United States in the form of music. We started
off by generating audio from the time series data we pulled from the
Center of Systems Science and Engineering at John Hopkins University,
then applied style transfer to make music from the audios. With this, we
hope to output music that can show the growth of COVID-19 confirmed
cases since it started.

Some challenges that might arise are that we are not completely
confident about the appropriateness of the music generated by the LSTM
neural network. And since we do not have large enough dataset that would
allow us to build a proper neural network ourselves. Moreover, we are
afraid that our machines are not strong enough to run the neural
network. Last but not least, there are limited audio style transfer
techniques from our research and that we might not be able to produce
the music out of it.

**Data and Model**
------------------

-   Time series data: COVID-19 confirmed US cases up till June 4th,
     acquired from the CSSE at JHU. Database contains date, time,
     locations including state, longitude, latitude, and confirmed
     cases, recovery cases, and death cases. (link:
     [https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19/master/csse\_covid\_19\_data/csse\_covid\_19\_time\_series/time\_series\_covid19\_confirmed\_US.csv](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19/master/csse_covid_19_data/csse_covid_19_time_series/time_series_covid19_confirmed_US.csv))

-   Location data: extracted from the time series data mentioned above
     to do further analysis and to output our final audio.

-   RNN: We explored the RNN network in
     [Magenta](https://magenta.tensorflow.org/) and tried
     several examples they provided (Melody RNN, Music VAE0, and only
     found that they could not meet our need of making diverse music
     that represent different areas with limited time-series data.
     Additionally, some of our local computers cannot afford the
     computational cost and datahub is having a hard time dealing with
     Magenta library. Therefore, we decide to add some styles of music
     manually.

**Code**
--------

-   Data code: we downloaded the data of COVID-19 in America until
     2020/6/4 from the [CSSEG
     repository](https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19?fbclid=IwAR01PCDa9EYqA-6jD-8LEEtfSjUTMxZcS6Dsv-cuPtFz8TiNTi8PDL1nf-U)

-   Preprocessing code:
     [raw\_process.ipynb](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/code/notebook/raw%20process.ipynb),
     we split the original data set into 3 part:
     time\_series\_data.csv, location.csv, and other\_information.csv

 We do not have a training model here as the transitional neural
 networks cannot satisfy our need of making various styles of music in
 a less-structured form, so we decide to generate our music manually.

-   Generative methods (music):

    -   Miditime: 1. We use python miditime library to change our daily
         increase cases in different areas into sound whose bpm is 120
         and instrument is grand piano, and gives different base
         octaves and scalings for cities in the same state according to
         their geological location. The standard transformation
         notebooks for New York City and other areas are:
         [miditime-New York's
         tone.ipynb](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/code/notebook/miditime-New%20York's%20tone.ipynb),
         [miditime-New York
         State.ipynb](http://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/code/notebook/miditime-New%20York%20State.ipynb),
         [miditime-Calimix.ipynb](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/code/notebook/miditime-Calimix.ipynb),
         [miditime-Texas.ipynb](http://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/code/notebook/miditime-Texas.ipynb) 2.
         We then use miditime to make the US daily cases growth in
         total: [Midi representation of US County COVID-19
         growth](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/code/notebook/method2.ipynb)

    -   Mido: 1. We use python Mido library to change the channels and
         instruments of our different midi objects generated to make
         our own music. The notebooks are:
         [Change\_midi\_instrument.ipynb](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/code/notebook/Change%20midi%20instrument.ipynb),
         [Trumpet Style
         Transfer](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/code/notebook/style%20transfer%20%232.ipynb).

    -   We first extracted the target cities' map outline from Google
         images. Here we used a basic outline detection algorithm and
         we transformed all pixels inside the outline to gray for a
         better view experience.

    -   For each date, we randomly selected num \# (number of confirmed
         cases on that day) pixels inside of the outline and make it to
         (120, 20, 20) red.

    -   For each city, we will have 133 images in total. Since our
         corresponding midi is mix of four cities, we concatenate four
         cities' images into one

    -   We transform our list of images into a gif with the FPS rate the
         same with our MIDI sound, so if we play the gif and the midi
         simultaneously, each image corresponds to one pitch.

    -   Codes are in Generate Gif.ipynb

**Results**
-----------

1.  Music Output:

 a). New York overall cases trend:
 [new\_york\_overall.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/new_york_overall.mid),
 this is made by daily overall data in 120 bpm and grand piano, and it
 becomes higher and higher when cases increase as time moves on.

 b\) New York daily increase:
 [new\_york\_daily.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/new_york_daily.mid).
 This is made by daily increase cases in 120 bpm and grand piano. It gets
 gradually higher with variations in its second part.

 c\) New York State daily increase (except New York City): in 120 bpm and
 grand piano, we made 4 midi sounds that represent 4 different cities in
 New York State:
 [AL.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/NYmix/AL.mid)
 for Albany,
 [SA.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/NYmix/SA.mid)
 for Saratoga,
 [ES.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/NYmix/ES.mid)
 for Essex,
 [WY.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/NYmix/WY.mid)
 for Wyoming. Every midi starts in a different level of base octave and
 scaling based on its geological location (north cities get higher base
 octaves): AL.mid is C4 with C natural minor, WY.mid is C5 with C major,
 SA.mid is C6 with C harmonic minor, and ES.mid is C7 with C melodic
 minor. After making 4 midi, we mixed them together to make a
 representation of New York State, which is
 [NYmix.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/NYmix.mid).
 Then, we adjust the instruments for every city to add our styles into
 the music, and thus we have
 [NYmix\_various.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/NYmix_various.mid).
 The new instrument for each city is music box for Albany, violin for
 Wyoming, choir aahs for Saratoga, and synthesis choir for Essex.

 d\) California daily increase: in 120 bpm and grand piano, we made 4 midi
 sounds that represent 4 different cities in California:
 [SD.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/Calimix/SD.mid)
 for San Diego,
 [LA.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/Calimix/LA.mid)
 for Los Angeles,
 [SC.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/Calimix/SC.mid)
 for Sacramento, and
 [SF.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/Calimix/SF.mid)
 for San Francisco. Every midi starts in a different level of base octave
 and scaling based on its geological location (north cities get higher
 base octaves): SD.mid is C4 with C natural minor, LA.mid is C5 with C
 major, SF.mid is C6 with C harmonic minor, and SC.mid is C7 with C
 melodic minor. After making 4 midi, we mixed them together to make a
 representation of California, which is
 [calimix.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/calimix.mid).
 Then, we adjust the instruments for every city to add our styles into
 the music, and thus we have
 [calimix\_various.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/calimix_various.mid).
 The new instrument for each city is trumpet for San Diego, violin for
 Sacramento, church organ for San Francisco, and soundtrack for Los
 Angeles.

 e\) Texas daily increase: in 120 bpm and grand piano, we made 4 midi
 sounds that represent 4 different cities in Texas:
 [AU.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/Texas/AU.mid)
 for Austin,
 [DA.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/Texas/DA.mid)
 for Dallas,
 [EI.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/Texas/EI.mid)
 for El Paso and
 [HS.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/Texas/HS.mid)
 for Houston. Every midi starts in a different level of base octave and
 scaling based on its geological location (north cities get higher base
 octaves): HS.mid is C4 with C natural minor, AU.mid is C5 with C major,
 EI.mid is C6 with C harmonic minor, and DA.mid is C7 with C melodic
 minor. After making 4 midi, we mixed them together to make a
 representation of Texas, which is
 [Texas.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/Texas.mid).
 Then, we adjust the instruments for every city to add our styles into
 the music, and thus we have
 [Texas\_various.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/Texas_various.mid)
 . The new instrument for each city is electric guitar (clean) for
 Austin, electric bass (finger) for Dallas, electric piano for El Paso,
 and synthesis drum for Houston.

 f\) We then looked at the virus cases per county in the United States.
 Any time there is an increase in cases, we assign a note by looking at
 the scale between 1 and the maximum one day case increase in the United
 States. The note pitch decreases as the case velocity increases. As the
 number of counties that have increased case number goes up, the
 intensity of the sounds increases. We then looked at doing a style
 transfer on that midi file. The trumpet sounded quite good aesthetically
 so we put it there. The final result of this midi can be found at
 [trumpet.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/trumpet.mid),
 and the original piano file can be found at
 [myfile.mid](https://github.com/ucsd-dsc-arts/dsc160-final-dsc160-final-group13/blob/master/results/myfile.mid)

2.  GIF output:

    a.  We have two GIF outputs; The new\_york.gif represent only the
         new\_york data and is corresponding to the MIDI sound
         new\_york\_daily.mid

    b.  The new\_york\_state.gif is corresponding to the NYmix.mid

    c.  There are three more mix mid do not have corresponding gif since
         the way to generate is packed in the Generate Gif.ipynb. Since
         this is project mainly focusing on sound generation, we did
         not include them into the results.

**Discussion**
--------------

By making the midi sounds of COVID-19 data of different American cities
and mixing them by the states they are in, we create a series of music
artworks that give people unique insight of this pandemic and help us
memorize those victims and the whole pandemic. Those midi files in
general can be divided into 3 categories: 1. States midis mixed by
multiple cities (calimix.mid, NYmix.mid, Texas.mid and their
corresponding \~\_various.mid versions); 2. The cities midis, 4 cities
for each state and 2 midis for New York City; 3. Total representation of
daily new cases in the US. In general, those midi files are repetitive
at first half period, showing the silent 2 months of America COVID-19
pandemic, which is a dull but nervous melody. After the first part, some
dissonance appears in the midis that are made by daily increase data of
certain areas, while the midi made by New York City overall cases trend
gets higher and higher. In the end, the notes in state-wide and
national-wide midis (Category 1, 3) are jumping out from everywhere,
making a chaotic and disorder feeling. The overall case midi is still
going up while city daily increase midis get mader and mader. We were
worrying about making meaningless sounds at first, but the regular
overall trend and the madness that is growing up in our music reflect
this pandemic really well and our midis turn out to be possibly
impactful.

The whole idea and progress of making those music are quite innovative
compared with the traditional process, as it is going from a data
science perspective instead of traditional artist perspective. When
artists want to express their understanding of certain events, they have
to observe those events, convert the observation into their own feelings
and eventually make artworks based on their feelings. Our project,
however, goes directly from observation to artworks first, and then
adjusts the works with our feeling, which provides more objectivity.
Additionally, although midi and midi generation based on some
programming techniques are not rare in modern music production, making
sounds through scaling statistical data and making style adjustments
with coding are still a novel thing in the technology perspective.

By representing COVID-19's confirmed cases across the United States in
the form of music, we believe that it can deliver the message of how
dangerous it is and how we go to the point of pandemic today from the
beginning. Music is different from cold numbers. It went beyond
representing information. The inside ideas and emotions that music
carried around could make itself now delivering ideas and feelings.
However, there are limitations: unorganizable music is just a mixture of
pitches; They could only harm people instead of transferring the
feelings we expected. Awaring of this kind of problem, we tried to make
our music more diverse through the shift of instruments. In
Texas\_various.mid, we add drum sounds in the background to let people
feel the intense beat of the pandemic, and the soundtrack in
calimix\_various.mid provides a weird and terror feeling about
California's pandemic. New York City and New York State is the epicenter
of this pandemic in America, so we provide much more emphasis in the
diversity of delivering the data. We provide both overall case trends
and daily increase midis, adding 2 choir melodies to make a hollow
feeling, and making gifs to help people with traditional visualization.
At last, in order to give an overall feeling of how this pandemic looks
like, we made a midi that include all cities' daily increase data into
one midi and use a trumpet to play the sound. That midi generated from
looking at all the US county case increases was a more overarching
representation of the COVID-19 case growth. A surprising result was the
amount of (time) distance between the first outbreak and the general
start of the pandemic. It was quite interesting and chilling to see what
was the birth of something truly truly terrible. We hope those efforts
can change the abstract and chaotic sounds into more accessible
expressions of the current COVID-19 event.

"A dust of the time becomes a mountain when it lands on an individual's
shoulder." Behind the cold data, we see lifes that are just like us. As
the pandemic grows, people may get used to the tens of thousands daily
increase of new cases. However, we want to give dead data with life, and
the cold charts with temperature. Therefore, we bring out this suite of
COVID-19 data with the addition of gifs for the New York area. Now you
can hear the numbers and see the pandemic developing on this land. By
sharing this direct impact to the ones who hear it, we want to ignite
people's concern about this ongoing pandemic again and memorize the
whole event better. We wish people can remember, if once forget, their
sympathy towards those victims when hearing the choirs in
NYmix\_various.mid, and understand the urgency of the pandemic when the
drum is beating in Texas\_various.mid. After all, there is something we
cannot forget during this time, and our project is intended to help us
memorize some of those things, not only the data. That's not only for
the people who live in the current, but also for the future.

Throughout the project, we found that style transferring audio has
limited techniques and that we did not have much to try out to generate
better music. Therefore, in the future we hope to explore more
techniques and tools on style transferring audio into music to better
express these statistics. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, due to
technical issues, we were not able to run RNN to do further analysis and
explorations. To expand on this project, we do not just want to explore
new techniques and tools, we also wish to collect more data in order to
build our own neural network to train our own data. And hopefully we can
also apply the concept of this project onto other events or pandemic
throughout the history. Last but not least, we want to use data from all
over the world so everyone can understand and remember what COVID-19 has
done and is doing to us.

**Team Roles**
--------------

-   Byungheon Jeong: Got some of the initial data. Made the midi looking
     at all of the counties of the United States. Ran that through the
     style transfer made by Yiheng

-   Sabrina Ho: Made the presentation slides and recorded the final
     presentation. Wrote abstract, parts of the data and model section,
     parts of the code section, and discussion section.

-   Xinrui Zhan: Made the Gifs presented in the result section. Wrote
     parts of the code section, and parts of the results section, and
     parts of the discussion section.

-   Yiheng Ye: Done the preprocessing of data. Wrote Parts of Data and
     Modeling, Code, Result, and Discussion sections in the report.
     Made most of the midi sounds for this project. The sounds are
     mentioned in a-e paragraphs for music result in the Result
     section.

**Technical Notes and Dependencies**
------------------------------------

Libraries and packages:

-   [Miditime](https://pypi.org/project/miditime/): this
     library plays time series data as music.

    -   Installation: pip install miditime

-   [Mido](https://pypi.org/project/mido/): this library
     works with midi files.

    -   Installation: pip install mido

This project can be run on any platform. It does not require any
specific platform to run on.

**Reference**
-------------

-   Papers

    -   [Neural Translation of Musical
         Style](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1708.03535.pdf)

    -   [C-RNN-GAN: Continuous recurrent neural networks with
         adversarial
         training](http://mogren.one/publications/2016/c-rnn-gan/mogren2016crnngan.pdf)

-   Repositories

    -   [DeepMusicvStyle](https://github.com/daQuincy/DeepMusicvStyle)

    -   [CSSEGISandData/COVID-19](https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19?fbclid=IwAR01PCDa9EYqA-6jD-8LEEtfSjUTMxZcS6Dsv-cuPtFz8TiNTi8PDL1nf-U)

-   Blog posts

    -   [music21](http://web.mit.edu/music21/)

-   Tools

    -   [Mido](https://mido.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

    -   [Miditime](https://pypi.org/project/miditime/)

    -   [Magenta -
         Tensorflow](https://magenta.tensorflow.org/)
